Dear Editors,

We are excited to submit our manuscript "Mixed language processing increases cross-language phonetic transfer in Bengali-English Bilinguals" for consideration by Bilingualism: Language and Cognition. This is a revision of our earlier submission with manuscript ID BLC-21-0133.

In this article, we report on a speech production study with highly proficient bilingual speakers of Bengali and Indian English, to better understand how the language systems of bilingual individuals interact at the phonetic level. We find that L2 English vowels temporarily show an increased influence of L1 Bengali when speakers switch between languages. 

Prior research on short-term phonetic interaction has mostly focused on a small set of phonologically related languages. However, there is increasing evidence that both language-specific features and linguistic experience affect this phenomenon. This article expands the empirical scope of this research to a new pair of languages, and a yet-unstudied multilingual population whose phonetic behavior is likely to reflect real-world experience with mixed language processing. The bulk of existing research has studied transfer effects on voice onset time (VOT), a temporal feature. We focus on spectral properties of vowels to avoid confounds from independent differences between long an short-lag VOT languages. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that reports short-term transfer effects on L2 vowels. These findings raise questions for proposed inhibition-based accounts of phonetic transfer, and argue for a need to diversify the range of languages and features studied. 

As a secondary aim, we compare two existing experimental paradigms for eliciting mixed-language productions: code-switching and cued picture-naming, to verify if the postulated discursive factors in code-switching independently alter the behavior under study. Reported outcomes of short-term phonetic interaction vary greatly across studies, making generalizations about the mechanisms that underlie these patterns often rely crucially on the assumption of comparability between paradigms. Therefore, identifying paradigm-specific differences is particularly relevant for this line of research.

Short-term phonetic transfer is an active area of research relating to language processing and competence in bilingual individuals. Our results add to empirical data, and contribute to the ongoing discussion about the potential sources and implications of such interactions. We hope that this will be of interest to the readers of Bilingualism: Language and Cognition.



We will be happy to respond to any queries that you may have, and hope to hear from you soon.



Warmly,
Auromita